[INTERNAL] -- Sit rep review for 2020-04-10 (#348)
nextstrain/ncov: narratives/ncov_sit-rep_2020-04-10.md

We currently have sequences from samples taken in 57 countries across 6 continents. This is an incredible achievement -- sequencing an unknown, large RNA virus in the midst of a pandemic is difficult, and is only possible through the incredible work and timely sharing of data by scientists and physicians around the world.
<br><br>
While this data enables us to infer many useful characteristics of the outbreak and track its spread in real time, it's important to emphasize that our conclusions are limited by the available data.
<br><br>
For example, the map shows very few sequences from the global south. This is NOT because COVID-19 isn't circulating in these areas, or that these cases are not as crucial to understand; rather, we just don't have much data available from these areas. The size of each circle on the map indicates how much data is currently available from that area, rather than the true size of the outbreak.

<!-- There is NO right-side text -->

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text -->
# [Early spread within Asia](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-04-09?d=tree,map&dmax=2020-01-15&p=full)

> Here, we see samples from the first month of the outbreak.

Reviewer: "Here, we see samples from late Dev 2019 and January 2020 during the first month of the outbreak."

> Here, we see samples from the first month of the outbreak.

Author: ```suggestion
Here, we highlight samples from mid-December 2019 through mid-January 2020, during the first month of the outbreak.
```

> Each tip of the tree represents a sample from an infected individual.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Tips of the tree represent samples from infected individuals.
```
I trialed this paragraph on my Mom, who has a been looking at phylo trees with me for the last month. She thought because tip was singular it referred to the root of the tree. Apparently I've done a terrible job of explaining trees...

> Each internal node represents an unsampled case, which was the ancestor of all of the other cases within the descendant clade.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each internal node, or branch point, represents an unsampled case, which was the ancestor of all of the other cases within the descendant clade.
```
I think clade might also be confusing for people not familiar with phylo trees, but I can't think of another way to phrase it.

Author: Yeah, same here lol

<br><br>

> Tips are colored according to where they were sampled from; nodes are colored by the inferred (most likely) location of the ancestral case.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Tips are colored according to where they were sampled from; nodes (branch points) are colored by the inferred (most likely) location of the ancestral case.
```

<br><br>

> Comparing the trunk of the tree to the leaves helps us understand not only where infections are occurring, but also where they may have been acquired.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Comparing the trunk of the tree to the "leaves" (tips) helps us understand not only where infections are occurring, but also where they may have been acquired.  
```

<br><br>

> During this early period, the majority of sampled and inferred ancestral cases were located in Asia.

Author: ```suggestion
The common ancestor of circulating viruses appears to have emerged in Wuhan, China, in late Nov or early Dec 2019.
Accordingly, the majority of sampled and inferred ancestral cases were located in Asia during this early period.
```

This is consistent with circulation largely within Asia for the first month of the outbreak.  

> 

Reviewer: "The common ancestor of circulating viruses appears to have emerged in Wuhan, China, in late Nov or early Dec 2019."

<!-- There is no right side text -->

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text -->
# [Initial introductions to other regions](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-04-09?dmax=2020-02-15&dmin=2020-01-15&p=full&d=map,tree)

> During the 2nd month of the outbreak, we start to see individual cases crop up in North America, Europe and Oceania.

Reviewer: "During the 2nd month of the outbreak from mid-Jan to mid-Feb 2020..."

> During the 2nd month of the outbreak, we start to see individual cases crop up in North America, Europe and Oceania.

Author: ```suggestion
During the 2nd month of the outbreak, from mid-January to mid_February 2020, we start to see individual cases crop up in North America, Europe and Oceania.
```

These early samples still group with samples from Asia, and generally lack the hallmarks of local transmission.
<br><br>
This is consistent with initial sparks being thrown from the main outbreak in Asia to other parts of the world. Although most of these sparks did not result in localized outbreaks, at least two of these introductions took off.
<!-- There is no right side text -->

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text -->

> # [Cryptic transmission in Europe from mid-January](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-04-09?d=tree,map&dmax=2020-02-14&label=clade:A2&p=full)

Author: ```suggestion
# [Cryptic transmission in Europe from late January](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-04-09?d=tree,map&dmax=2020-02-14&label=clade:A2&p=full)
```

Zooming in to the top of the tree for the same time period, we see an ancestral European virus (internal node) that seeded the large European outbreak.
<br><br>
This indicates that while we hadn't yet sequenced any samples from this clade, the origins of the European outbreak were already cryptically circulating by mid-January.

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text -->

> # [Cryptic transmission in North America from mid-January](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-04-09?d=tree,map&dmax=2020-02-14&label=clade:B1&p=full)

Author: ```suggestion
# [Cryptic transmission in North America from late January](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-04-09?d=tree,map&dmax=2020-02-14&label=clade:B1&p=full)
```

Similarly, zooming in to the bottom of the tree, we see an ancestral North American virus (internal node) that initiated what would later become a large outbreak in North America.
<br><br>
This indicates that although we only had 1 sequenced case from this cluster at the time, the virus was circulating cryptically within North America by mid-January.

<!-- There is no right side text -->

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text -->
# [Expansion of North American and European outbreaks](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-04-09?dmax=2020-03-15&dmin=2020-02-15&p=full&d=tree,map)

> During the 3rd month of the outbreak, these two clusters expanded to cause large outbreaks within Europe and North America, respectively.

Reviewer: "During the 3rd month of the outbreak from mid-Feb to mid-Mar 2020..."

> During the 3rd month of the outbreak, these two clusters expanded to cause large outbreaks within Europe and North America, respectively.

Author: ```suggestion
During the 3rd month of the outbreak, from mid-February to mid-March 2020, these two clusters expanded to cause large outbreaks within Europe and North America, respectively.
```

<!-- There is no right side text -->

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text -->

> # [Spread across international borders](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-04-09?dmax=2020-03-15&dmin=2020-02-15&f_region=North%20America&p=full&r=division&d=tree,map)

Reviewer 3: It's unfortunate that the map doesn't zoom appropritately here. I'm guessing this is due to the map being shown in "triplicate" for nCoV.

Reviewer: I suspect that coloring by division would better illustrate your point. With just the red coloring by country, there could be state level structure that we just don't see due to the color choice.

> # [Spread across international borders](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-04-09?dmax=2020-03-15&dmin=2020-02-15&f_region=North%20America&p=full&r=division&d=tree,map)

Author: ```suggestion
# [Spread across international borders](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-04-09?dmax=2020-03-15&dmin=2020-02-15&f_region=North%20America&p=full&r=division&d=tree,map&c=division)
```

This is demonstrated here by the intermingling of samples from multiple U.S. states and Canadian provinces.
<br><br>
We've previously reported on a similar pattern of frequent mixing of viral lineages between European countries.
<!-- There is no right side text -->

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text -->
# [Introductions from North America & Europe to other parts of the globe](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-04-09?dmax=2020-03-15&dmin=2020-02-15&f_region=Africa,South%20America,Oceania&p=full&d=tree,map)

These clusters are not restricted to their respective regions. During this time period, we also see cases from South America, Oceania, and Africa against a backdrop of primarily European and North American clades. This indicates that there were frequent intercontinental introductions during this time period.
<br><br>
Interestingly, samples from the global south span the full breadth of the tree, indicating that these regions' outbreaks are mixtures of many viral lineages.

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text -->

> # [Coming full circle: reintroductions to Asia](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-04-09?branchLabel=clade&d=tree,map&dmin=2020-03-14&f_region=Asia&p=full&r=division)

Reviewer 3: Please remove the `branchLabel` query here (unless there's a specific reason it's included which i'm missing)

> # [Coming full circle: reintroductions to Asia](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-04-09?branchLabel=clade&d=tree,map&dmin=2020-03-14&f_region=Asia&p=full&r=division)

Author: ```suggestion
# [Coming full circle: reintroductions to Asia](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-04-09?d=tree,map&dmin=2020-03-14&f_region=Asia&p=full&r=division)
```

Each internal node, or branch point, represents an unsampled case, which was the ancestor of all of the other cases within the descendant clade.
<br><br>
Tips are colored according to where they were sampled from; nodes (branch points) are colored by the inferred (most likely) location of the ancestral case.
<br><br>
Comparing where a sequence was isolated from geographically to where its ancestors were circulating can help us understand not only where infections are occurring, but also where they may have been acquired.
<br><br>
The common ancestor of circulating viruses appears to have emerged in Wuhan, China, in late Nov or early Dec 2019.
Accordingly, the majority of sampled and inferred ancestral cases were located in Asia during this early period.
This is consistent with circulation largely within China and some exported cases to other countries in Asia for the first month of the outbreak.  

<!-- There is no right side text -->

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text -->
# [Initial introductions to other regions](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-04-09?dmax=2020-02-15&dmin=2020-01-15&p=full&d=map,tree)

> During the 2nd month of the outbreak, from mid-January to mid_February 2020, we start to see individual cases crop up in North America, Europe and Oceania.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
During the 2nd month of the outbreak, from mid-January to mid-February 2020, we start to see individual cases crop up in North America, Europe and Oceania.
```

These early samples still group with samples from Asia, and generally lack the hallmarks of local transmission.
<br><br>
This is consistent with initial sparks being thrown from the main outbreak in Asia to other parts of the world. Although most of these sparks did not result in localized outbreaks, at least two of these introductions took off.
<!-- There is no right side text -->

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text -->
# [Cryptic transmission in Europe from late January](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-04-09?d=tree,map&dmax=2020-02-14&label=clade:A2&p=full)

Zooming in to the top of the tree for the same time period, we see an ancestral European virus (internal node) that seeded the large European outbreak.
<br><br>

> This indicates that while we hadn't yet sequenced any samples from this clade, the origins of the European outbreak were already circulating undetected by late January.

Reviewer 4: I'd agree with Nicola here - "undetected by late January to early February." I've got a lot of journalists asking questions about this type of stuff at the moment and I'd rather us err on the side of caution and open intervals here rather than spend ages trying to beat them back later....

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text -->
# [Cryptic transmission in North America from late January](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-04-09?d=tree,map&dmax=2020-02-14&label=clade:B1&p=full)

Similarly, zooming in to the bottom of the tree, we see an ancestral North American virus (internal node) that initiated what would later become a large outbreak in North America.
<br><br>

> This indicates that although we only had 1 sequenced case from this cluster at the time, the virus was circulating undetected within North America by late January.

Reviewer 4: Again, I'd say 'late Jan to early Feb'. If we look at the North American build (with more sequences) the confidence intervals are wider on this clade and overlap with early Feb. That's worth taking into account, I think! And I'd rather us be more unsure in the outset then have to walk back later!

<!-- There is no right side text -->

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text -->
# [Expansion of North American and European outbreaks](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-04-09?dmax=2020-03-15&dmin=2020-02-15&p=full&d=tree,map)

> During the 3rd month of the outbreak, from mid-February to mid-March 2020, these two clusters expanded to cause large outbreaks within Europe and North America, respectively.

Reviewer 4: And more restricted spread in Oceania (?). There's a fair blue cluster there, seems maybe worth a mention? (Just to be clear we aren't ignoring it?)

<br><br>
Interestingly, samples from the global south span the full breadth of the tree, indicating that these regions' outbreaks are mixtures of many viral lineages.

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text -->
# [Coming full circle: reintroductions to Asia](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-04-09?d=tree,map&dmin=2020-03-14&f_region=Asia&p=full&r=division)

In the last month, the pandemic has come full circle. Here, we see re-introductions from Europe and North America back to Asia.
<br><br>
This resoundingly demonstrates that this pandemic is a global fight; we all must help control this virus everywhere if we hope to defeat it anywhere.

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text 13-->
# [Takeaways](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/2020-03-27?c=country&d=map&p=full)
<br>
<!-- This is the right-side text -->

```auspiceMainDisplayMarkdown

> # [What you can do](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/2020-03-27?c=country&d=map&p=full)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
# What you can do
```
This is causing the page to not show correctly - technically this is a header for a new 'slide'! So I'm having this split in half in a super-weird way :)
